ASTR430 Homework #3
Due Thursday March 31, 2026
1. Go over your midterm and the midterm solutions so that you understand how to ace these
problems if you ever see them again. Bring questions to class.
2. For this question, you will use the Solar System Collisions website at
http://janus.astro.umd.edu/astro/impact/ .
a) Investigate collisions with the planets Mars, Venus, and Earth. Determine the maximum-
sized rocky object that is destroyed in the planet’s atmosphere to two significant figures (e.g.
4.3 m or 43 km). Use the default collision speed of 20km/s.
b) How much energy is released by the largest airbursts on each planet (in Megatons)? How
often does this happen?
c) What are the smallest craters that can be produced on these planets?
d) Saturn’s satellite Titan has an atmosphere about ten times thicker than Earth’s. What sorts
of impact craters might you expect to find on its surface?
3. Pressure at Earth’s center. a) Find the accepted value from Appendix E. Compare with the
predictions of a uniform density planet by first deriving and then applying Eq. 3.21. Finally,
work out the fraction of the pressure that comes from the core - the part of the planet with
r < R/2.
b) Make a more realistic approximation by considering a two component Earth with an iron core
mass mc = 1.98 × 1024kg and radius rc = 3485km and a mantle mass mm = 4.00 × 1024kg and
radius rm = 6371km. Start by determining the average densities of the core and the mantle. The
gravity in the core increases linearly with distance, while the gravity in the mantle is roughly
constant (to within 10%). Calculate the gravity at the core-mantle boundary and compare with
the known surface value. Use the average value for the entire mantle. Now determine the core
and mantle contributions to the central pressure separately and sum them. Discuss your results.
4. a) Impact Pressure. The pressure produced by an impact depends on only the speed of
impact v, the radius R of the assumed spherical impactor, and the density of the target ρ (for
simplicity assumed equal to that of the impactor). Use dimensional analysis to solve for x, y,
and z in the following expression:
P = CρxRyvz
where C is an unknown dimensionless constant.
b) Solve for C as follows. Pressure is a force per area, and Force is the change of momentum
dp of target material in time dt. Assume that the target material is pasted onto the front of a
normally-incident impactor and forced to accelerate up to the impactor’s speed. Why can we
make this assumption? Write down an expression for P after the impactor has penetrated a
distance d << R into the target. Treat the accelerated material as a cylinder of height d and
radius r << R. What is the value of C?
c) Calculate the pressure for a R=10km ρ = 3 g/cm3 impactor hitting Earth at v=20km/s and
compare to the pressure at Earth’s center found in Appendix E. Discuss implications for high
pressure minerals found near impact sites.
5. Do the optional online mid-semester class evaluation for extra credit points.

-- 1 of 1 --

